DATA MANAGEMENT PLAN

(To be filled in and uploaded as deliverable in the Portal Grant
Management System, at the due date foreseen in the system (and regularly
updated).

[]The template is recommended but not mandatory. If you do not use it,
please make however sure that you comply with the research data
management requirements under Article 17 of the Grant Agreement.)

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  PROJECT
  ---------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  Project number:              [project number]

  Project acronym:             [acronym]

  Project name:                [project title]
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  DATA MANAGEMENT PLAN
  ---------------------------- ------------------------------------------
  Date:                        [dd/mm/yyyy]

  Version:                     [DMP version]
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Data Summary

Will you re-use any existing data and what will you re-use it for? State
the reasons if re-use of any existing data has been considered but
discarded.

What types and formats of data will the project generate or re-use?

What is the purpose of the data generation or re-use and its relation to
the objectives of the project?

What is the expected size of the data that you intend to generate or
re-use?

What is the origin/provenance of the data, either generated or re-used?

To whom might your data be useful ('data utility'), outside your
project?

FAIR data

Making data findable, including provisions for metadata

Will data be identified by a persistent identifier?

Will rich metadata be provided to allow discovery? What metadata will be
created? What disciplinary or general standards will be followed? In
case metadata standards do not exist in your discipline, please outline
what type of metadata will be created and how.

Will search keywords be provided in the metadata to optimize the
possibility for discovery and then potential re-use?

Will metadata be offered in such a way that it can be harvested and
indexed?

Making data accessible

Repository:

Will the data be deposited in a trusted repository?

Have you explored appropriate arrangements with the identified
repository where your data will be deposited?

Does the repository ensure that the data is assigned an identifier? Will
the repository resolve the identifier to a digital object?

Data:

Will all data be made openly available? If certain datasets cannot be
shared (or need to be shared under restricted access conditions),
explain why, clearly separating legal and contractual reasons from
intentional restrictions. Note that in multi-beneficiary projects it is
also possible for specific beneficiaries to keep their data closed if
opening their data goes against their legitimate interests or other
constraints as per the Grant Agreement.

If an embargo is applied to give time to publish or seek protection of
the intellectual property (e.g. patents), specify why and how long this
will apply, bearing in mind that research data should be made available
as soon as possible.

Will the data be accessible through a free and standardized access
protocol?

If there are restrictions on use, how will access be provided to the
data, both during and after the end of the project?

How will the identity of the person accessing the data be ascertained?

Is there a need for a data access committee (e.g. to evaluate/approve
access requests to personal/sensitive data)?

Metadata:

Will metadata be made openly available and licenced under a public
domain dedication CC0, as per the Grant Agreement? If not, please
clarify why. Will metadata contain information to enable the user to
access the data?

How long will the data remain available and findable? Will metadata be
guaranteed to remain available after data is no longer available?

Will documentation or reference about any software be needed to access
or read the data be included? Will it be possible to include the
relevant software (e.g. in open source code)?

Making data interoperable

What data and metadata vocabularies, standards, formats or methodologies
will you follow to make your data interoperable to allow data exchange
and re-use within and across disciplines? Will you follow
community-endorsed interoperability best practices? Which ones?

In case it is unavoidable that you use uncommon or generate project
specific ontologies or vocabularies, will you provide mappings to more
commonly used ontologies? Will you openly publish the generated
ontologies or vocabularies to allow reusing, refining or extending them?

Will your data include qualified references[1] to other data (e.g. other
data from your project, or datasets from previous research)?

Increase data re-use

How will you provide documentation needed to validate data analysis and
facilitate data re-use (e.g. readme files with information on
methodology, codebooks, data cleaning, analyses, variable definitions,
units of measurement, etc.)?

Will your data be made freely available in the public domain to permit
the widest re-use possible? Will your data be licensed using standard
reuse licenses, in line with the obligations set out in the Grant
Agreement?

Will the data produced in the project be useable by third parties, in
particular after the end of the project?

Will the provenance of the data be thoroughly documented using the
appropriate standards?

Describe all relevant data quality assurance processes.

Further to the FAIR principles, DMPs should also address research
outputs other than data, and should carefully consider aspects related
to the allocation of resources, data security and ethical aspects.

Other research outputs

In addition to the management of data, beneficiaries should also
consider and plan for the management of other research outputs that may
be generated or re-used throughout their projects. Such outputs can be
either digital (e.g. software, workflows, protocols, models, etc.) or
physical (e.g. new materials, antibodies, reagents, samples, etc.).

Beneficiaries should consider which of the questions pertaining to FAIR
data above, can apply to the management of other research outputs, and
should strive to provide sufficient detail on how their research outputs
will be managed and shared, or made available for re-use, in line with
the FAIR principles.

Allocation of resources

What will the costs be for making data or other research outputs FAIR in
your project (e.g. direct and indirect costs related to storage,
archiving, re-use, security, etc.) ?

How will these be covered? Note that costs related to research
data/output management are eligible as part of the Horizon Europe grant
(if compliant with the Grant Agreement conditions)

Who will be responsible for data management in your project?

How will long term preservation be ensured? Discuss the necessary
resources to accomplish this (costs and potential value, who decides and
how, what data will be kept and for how long)?

Data security

What provisions are or will be in place for data security (including
data recovery as well as secure storage/archiving and transfer of
sensitive data)?

Will the data be safely stored in trusted repositories for long term
preservation and curation?

Ethics

Are there, or could there be, any ethics or legal issues that can have
an impact on data sharing? These can also be discussed in the context of
the ethics review. If relevant, include references to ethics
deliverables and ethics chapter in the Description of the Action (DoA).

Will informed consent for data sharing and long term preservation be
included in questionnaires dealing with personal data?

Other issues

Do you, or will you, make use of other
national/funder/sectorial/departmental procedures for data management?
If yes, which ones (please list and briefly describe them)?

+--------+------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| H      |            |                                               |
| ISTORY |            |                                               |
| OF     |            |                                               |
| C      |            |                                               |
| HANGES |            |                                               |
+========+============+===============================================+
| V      | P          | CHANGE                                        |
| ERSION | UBLICATION |                                               |
|        | DATE       |                                               |
+--------+------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| 1.0    | 05.05.2021 |   Initial version (new MFF).                  |
+--------+------------+-----------------------------------------------+
| 1.1    | 01.04.2022 |   Reformatted to align with other             |
|        |            |   deliverables templates.                     |
+--------+------------+-----------------------------------------------+
|        |            |                                               |
+--------+------------+-----------------------------------------------+
|        |            |                                               |
+--------+------------+-----------------------------------------------+

[1] A qualified reference is a cross-reference that explains its intent.
For example, X is regulator of Y is a much more qualified reference than
X is associated with Y, or X see also Y. The goal therefore is to create
as many meaningful links as possible between (meta)data resources to
enrich the contextual knowledge about the data. (Source:
https://www.go-fair.org/fair-principles/i3-metadata-include-qualified-references-metadata/)
